 T h e  February TIOBE Index of the most
 p o pular programming languages is out,
 a n d   w hile the work going on in the
background  of  TIOBE  calculations  has
changed, not much has shifted in the way
 o f   rankings. Python continues to sit
atop the index, with C and Java directly
 b e h ind it. In Feb. 2021, those three
 a l s o occupied the top spot, but with
 P ython in the number three position, C
at top, and Java in second place. Beyond
 t h e top three, there hasn’t been much
 m o vement in the index, with positions
 f o ur through eight unchanged from the
 s a m e time last year. Those slots are
occupied,   respectively,  by  C++,  C#,
Visual   Basic,   JavaScript   and  PHP.
 Positions nine and 10 swapped from Feb.
 2 1  to now, with Assembly Language and
SQL     now     occupying    each    other’s
 p o s i tions. The one big move of note
between Feb. 2021 and Feb. 2022 was with
the   Groovy  programming  language,  an
 object-oriented language for Java. Over
the course of the year, Groovy fell from
12th  position  all  the  way  to  20th,
putting   it  perilously  close  to  the
“other   programming   languages”  list.
TIOBE    CEO    Paul    Jansen    attributes
 G r oovy’s decline to the growth in the
CI/CD   space.   Groovy   was  the  only
 l a n guage used for writing scripts on
Jenkins,   which   Jansen  describes  as
having been “the only real player in the
CI/CD   domain”   early  on.  Now,  with
platforms  that  don’t  require  Groovy,
 l i ke GitHub, Azure DevOps and GitLab,
Groovy is losing its place at the table.
“Groovy could have grown further because
it     was     the     major    script-based
alternative for Java running on the same
JVM. However, Kotlin is taking over that
 p o sition right now, so I think Groovy
will have a hard time,” Jensen said. The
TIOBE index may not be full of surprises
this month, but Jansen did have a lot to
 s ay about the index itself this month,
 a s  this is the first time it has been
compiled   using   Similarweb’s  traffic
 analysis platform instead of Alexa. “We
 have used Similarweb for the first time
 this month to select search engines and
fortunately, there are no big changes in
 t h e  index due to this swap. The only
 s t riking difference is that the top 3
languages,  Python,  C,  and  Java,  all
gained   more  than  1  percent  in  the
rankings,” Jansen said. TIOBE decided to
make   the   switch   this  month  after
 A mazon’s announcement in December 2021
that  it  was  shutting  the  Alexa  web
 r anking service down, effective May 1,
 2 0 22, ending 25 years of the program.
 Jansen noted that not every website has
 b een onboarded, but that the switch to
 S i milarweb included a switch to using
 H t m lUnit, a non-GUI web browser with
 A P Is that let Java apps invoke pages,
 f i l l forms and do other standard web
browsing   activity.  This  switch  will
eventually   allow   TIOBE   to  include
 websites it was unable to crawl before,
 l i ke Stackoverflfow and Github, which
 c o uld have a larger impact on scores.
