The  February  TIOBE  Index of the most
popular  programming  languages is out,
and  while  the  work  going  on in the
background  of TIOBE’s calculations has
changed,  not  much  has shifted in the
way of rankings.
Python continues to sit atop the index,
with  C and Java directly behind it. In
Feb.  2021,  those  three also occupied
the  top  spot,  but with Python in the
number  three  position,  C at top, and
Java in second place.
Beyond the top three, there hasn’t been
much   movement   in  the  index,  with
positions  four through eight unchanged
from  the  same  time  last year. Those
slots  are  occupied,  respectively, by
C++,  C#,  Visual Basic, JavaScript and
PHP. Positions nine and 10 swapped from
Feb.  21 to now, with Assembly Language
and  SQL  now  occupying  each  other’s
positions.
The  one  big move of note between Feb.
2021  and Feb. 2022 was with the Groovy
programming         language,        an
object-oriented language for Java. Over
the  course  of  the  year, Groovy fell
from 12th position all the way to 20th,
putting  it  perilously  close  to  the
“other programming languages” list.
TIOBE   CEO   Paul   Jansen  attributes
Groovy’s  decline  to the growth in the
CI/CD   space.   Groovy  was  the  only
language  used  for  writing scripts on
Jenkins,   which  Jansen  describes  as
having  been  “the  only real player in
the  CI/CD  domain” early on. Now, with
platforms  that  don’t  require Groovy,
like  GitHub,  Azure DevOps and GitLab,
Groovy  is  losing  its  place  at  the
table.
“Groovy   could   have   grown  further
because  it  was the major script-based
alternative  for  Java  running  on the
same  JVM.  However,  Kotlin  is taking
over  that  position  right  now,  so I
think  Groovy  will  have a hard time,”
Jensen said.
The  TIOBE  index  may  not  be full of
surprises  this  month,  but Jansen did
have  a  lot  to  say  about  the index
itself this month, as this is the first
time   it   has   been  compiled  using
Similarweb’s  traffic analysis platform
instead of Alexa.
“We  have used Similarweb for the first
time   this   month  to  select  search
engines  and  fortunately, there are no
big  changes  in  the index due to this
swap.  The  only striking difference is
that  the  top  3 languages, Python, C,
and   Java,  all  gained  more  than  1
percent in the rankings,” Jansen said.
TIOBE  decided  to make the switch this
month  after  Amazon’s  announcement in
December  2021 that it was shutting the
Alexa   web   ranking   service   down,
effective  May 1, 2022, ending 25 years
of the program.
Jansen noted that not every website has
been  onboarded, but that the switch to
Similarweb  included  a switch to using
HtmlUnit,  a  non-GUI  web browser with
APIs  that  let Java apps invoke pages,
fill  forms  and  do other standard web
browsing  activity.  This  switch  will
eventually   allow   TIOBE  to  include
websites it was unable to crawl before,
like  Stackoverflfow  and Github, which
could have a larger impact on scores.